I think it was about 15,000 people pulled out of
there that day. And we did not have a single
accident other than the one I described in doing
that. And this was accomplished, if my memory
serves me correctly, with one heavy helicopter
squadron of CH-52s, two
H-34 squadrons and we had a Huey squadron which was
really used in reserve. So there was a small number
of Marine helicopter pilots.
Earned their pay.
And my hat's off to them. They did a tremendous job.
And, of course, the Marines that went into the
embassy there did a tremendous job. They did not
have a single solitary casualty, nor did they kill
anybody.
They were able to do this and get out of there
without any problem. So I'm proud of them.
Emotionally, what did you think about the
evacuation and the war was coming to an end and
you're evacuating everybody out? Well, I
hated to see us desert the Vietnamese Army
because I had seen what communism would do. I saw,
for instance, what the North Vietnamese did in Hue
Phu Bai during the Tet Offensive. All of the
Vietnamese that were working with us then, I
shouldn't say all, but many of them were killed.
They had their hands cut off. There were all kinds
of atrocities that were committed by the North
Vietnamese and the Viet Cong during the Tet
Offensive. Well, there was no reason to believe
that anything less than that was going to occur
when the North Vietnamese took over.
So yes, I had great sympathy for the people in the
South Vietnamese Army and The civilians, of
course, that had been a part of our effort there, I
knew that they were going to be mistreated badly.
But you can't really dwell on things like that.
Your orders are to do a certain thing, so you do it.
And you just have to have faith that your
government or something is going to try to do the
best they can in other areas. And it was a sad day.
There's no doubt about that.
What were your feelings about the Vietnamese?
Well, the Vietnamese are good people.
The Oriental
is not well understood by most Americans, and I
don't claim to be an expert on that, but I have
better understanding, I guess, than the average
person. But he's a hardworking person. He wants to
be free as much as you and I do.
But I think because they are basically a peaceable
people who work hard, then they're
more apt to be taken over by a group such as the
communists. Because really all they want to do is
work and be left alone. So communism can come in
with a few people and get organized and so forth and
get control. And that basically is what happened.
Now, there were crooks within the Vietnamese
government.
There's crooks in any government. There's, you
know, graft. There's greedy people. There's
people who see an opportunity to make a windfall.
And they did that. But there was no more in the
Vietnamese society than what there is ours.
They're basically good people. And I would like to
see that land be free one day.
I don't foresee that. in the near future, but I
would certainly like to see it. How'd you feel
about Army? Well, they had the same problem that I
alluded to that our Army had. See, they started out
with nothing in 1964. Basically
nothing. that actually had started before that.
But the size of the Army prior to 64 was next to
nothing. They started drafting people, putting
them in uniform, putting them in organizations,
assigning people to command them that didn't know
anything whatsoever about military, and giving
them a ill-defined job and mission And then why
should anybody be surprised that they performed
in a very poor manner? We started giving them
advisors and so forth. And again, General
Schwarzkopf alluded to this in his book. When they
had good commanders, they had good units. When
they had bad commanders, They had bad units. If you
had a battalion commander that did not know what to
do or how to do it, what can you expect of him? And so
being as they started from nothing and mobilized
to a rather large force for them, you have to assume
that a lot of the commanders were politically
appointed. It's that simple. And you know, you
take a person who's inept, and today he's a
civilian, tomorrow he's a major commanding an
ARVN battalion, he's still inept.
If he's lucky, he would get a good advisor and would
be smart enough to listen to him.
If he didn't get all of his people killed in the
meantime, he would eventually develop into a
reasonable unit. But you compare them to a Marine
battalion, for instance, and there would be no
comparison. They didn't know how to use
supporting arms, for instance. And of course,
their artillerymen were equally ill-prepared.
So for a long time, they could call for artillery
support. And because it had to go through so many
layers to get approval to include civilians, that
by the time they'd get a fire mission approved,
there wouldn't be any point to fire it. The enemy's
gone. So they worked under some terrible
restrictions that we did not work under.
So I think before we judged them too severely, all
those things had to be taken into consideration.
They worked under conditions that made it almost
impossible most of the time for them to succeed.
How did your views change on the Vietnamese during
the course of the war?
Well, I don't know as it did. I could recognize from
the outset that they were... Now, when you say
Vietnamese, do you mean the army or the... The
South Vietnamese, just the people. The people. I
don't know as it changed. I respected them.
They're different people. Their religion is
different. Their culture is different. I did not
understand much of their culture and most of their
religion. And I'm sure they didn't understand
mine. But they're good people and all they wanted
was to be left alone to live. That's all they
wanted. The communists wouldn't do it and there
were times I'm sure when they thought we were kind
of being strong armed in our support of them.
But you have to realize, when you're the 800-pound
gorilla, and that's what we were,
you go into an area, you do a lot of damage.
We tore roads up. We tore cemeteries up. Not
intentionally. But you move a large force
through, you move tanks through, the
terrain was such that it just wasn't built for
armies like we were. I'm sure they got mad at us. I'm
sure there's times when I would get a little upset
with them when I couldn't understand, here I am
over here trying to save your country and you're
concerned about Me knocking this fence down to
your house or something. You can't take a tank
that's eight foot wide through a road that's six
foot wide without tearing something up. If you
believe that you've got to get through there, then
you're going to go through there. But
my view of the Vietnamese people didn't change.
They're good people. They were in a terrible
situation. Most of us are good people. We were in a
terrible situation. We were trying to make the
best of them. A bad situation. See, in almost every
other war that we've ever fought, the
non-combatants got out of the way and let the
combatants fight. But they didn't do that in this
war.
Uh, When, for instance, when my unit had
responsibility for the highway, we would often,
not often, every night, we would go out with ambush
patrols, which would, in many cases, be 200 yards
outside of a village where 300 or 400 people were
living and sleeping that night. Or we might go out,
as we often did, and set up an ambush patrol in one of
their cemeteries and wait for a Viet Cong patrol to
come through. Because that's the way the terrain
and so forth was.
And I'm sure they were upset with us, and I'm sure
there were times when I was upset with them.
How did your views about the South Vietnamese Army
change over the course of the war? Well, I think in
many cases the poor commanders were weeded out and
better commanders evolved. So they actually
became a more
effective combat force. But I found it strange,
for instance, that they furnished liaison
officers to us. That about once a month, my liaison
officer would want to go home for three or four days
while the war was going on. Look at it from his
standpoint. Lord, this war had been going on for
seven or eight years then and might very well go on
for another seven or eight years. And yes, he had a
family maybe 60 to 100 kilometers off. Why
wouldn't he want to go?
All things considered, I think they
did pretty well. One of the factors that's often
lost when people start trying to judge and put a
handle on that is a conventional army fighting a
guerrilla army is a mess at best.
First of all, a conventional army usually is
heavy. It's got lots of equipment, trucks,
helicopters, guns, so forth. And when that's the
case, then you're going to be pretty stationary. A
guerrilla army can come and go as they please. They
can just, you can see guerrillas one minute in an
area. You can send people over there and they've
evaporated. They've become part of the village.
But that
That regular army that's trying to fight him is
always there. He's always visible.
It's tough.
And there have been very, very few occasions in
history where a guerrilla army has not actually,
in the end, come out on top.
It's just the nature of the beast. It's tough.
How were women treated from what you saw over
there?
Now, do you mean the Vietnamese women? Vietnamese
women. Well, there again, this was a subject that
was constantly talked about in my view. There was
never any doubt in anybody's mind as to what I
expected.
The dumbest private in my battalion knew that if he
mistreated or if he tried to rape or steal or
anything like that, that I would lock his butt up so
quick it would make his head swim.
No ifs, ands, or buts about it. So as a result, we
didn't have any trouble.
First of all, when we were in the Waifu Bay area, we
were so busy that it is just unreal. We were
probably taking care of what at least three
battalions should have had. And so my troops were
so busy that when they were given an hour off, they
slept. Because we were patrolling most of the day
and all of the night. And so what little bit of time
that they had off, they slept.
But they also knew that there was not going to be any
room for error. as it related to treating those
people with dignity. And so they did. The
truth matters, I don't recall ever having any
problems reported to me. And believe me, we worked
closely enough with the village chiefs and so
forth, that if there was a problem, we had a
technique of them getting the word to us quickly
what was going on. But the key to it is this. My
people knew because this sort of thing was
discussed, I would say, at least three or four
times a week in the battalion commander's
conference where all of his staff and his company
commanders were present. These sort of things
were covered, and then it went downhill that we
didn't have a problem. Now also, we had a system
where when replacements came in, they were not
sent down to the rifle companies until they had
gone through an orientation program, part of
which involved my telling them what would be done
and what would not be done. So there was no doubt as
to whether everybody had the word that this sort of
stuff would not be tolerated that we would respect
them as people, that we respect their religion and
all of its symbols and so forth. So but I put that the
leadership, you know, that's the reason for
having off is so that the will of the commander is is
transmitted right down to the lowest level and
then You know, the last leadership technique is
supervise. And the brand, the newest second
lieutenant that I had knew that his primary job was
to see that what I wanted done was done. And that I
would nail his hide to the wall if it was not done.
So you didn't tolerate any form of racism? None
whatsoever. Did you allow to call the Vietnamese
people by racial slurs or anything like that?
Well, no. It was not officially allowed. But now,
I'm not naive.
That goes on today in our society. And you can keep a
rein on it, but you cannot stop it. But as long as
they know there's a rain on it, then it's not good.
It'll never get you in trouble. But, yeah, there's
some, I'm sure there is. How did we lose the war? We
didn't lose the war. We lost the will to fight a war.
And there's a difference.
The will to fight the war was a political thing.
The war is a military thing. Now, when we lost the
will as a nation to do what was necessary from the
military standpoint, then it was just a matter of
time until inevitably it was going to crumble. But
it's like taking bricks out of a wall. You can take
so many bricks out in what used to be a formidable
thing becomes a menace. It'll fall on you, will not
protect you from anything after so many bricks
have been taken out. And that is precisely what
happened.
Was the war a mistake? No. Why?
Anything that is judged after the game is over is
going to be judged very unfairly.
President Eisenhower was the first one to get us
involved in Vietnam. A lot of people don't realize
that. Then came President John Kennedy who
started to accelerate all this. In a perfect world
a person in responsibility such as President
Kennedy or so forth would have perfect
information on which to base a decision to do
something. And hence, whatever decision he made
would probably be perfect. But that, well, there
never has been such a situation and there never
will be. But I don't recall really what the
intelligence was. But I was on Okinawa in 1961.
And I recall the intelligence briefings that we
were getting then as it related to Laos, which was
really more important than Vietnam at that time,
and also then Vietnam. We followed it very
closely. But some people say that military
intelligence is an oxymoron. Well, that's not
true, of course. But intelligence really starts
out as just a lot of information.
And again, it's usually provided by people that
have a vested interest. Anytime you get
information or advice from someone with a vested
interest, you have a slanted interest. bit of
information. And if you act on information that is
less than perfect, then your action is going to be
less than perfect. I truly believe with all my
heart that President Kennedy, President Johnson
was provided the best available information As to
whether or not it was misinterpreted, either on
the military level or on the political level, I
don't know.
I'm sure that they made decisions that they
thought was best not only for this country as it
relates to meeting our worldwide
responsibility, but best for Vietnam. Some of
them turned out not to be good decisions. But if
there's any one thing that you learn Once a
decision has been made on what you believe to be the
best available information, go with it. If the
information changes, then change. But a lot of
these things can be equated to launching a bullet.
Once that thing has been launched, it has a life of
its own. And watch out down range. And sometimes
that's about all you can do is say, look out.
You may have been wrong. And the best you can do is
say, look out. Here it comes. Drop that bomb. You
truly believe it's on target when you drop that
bomb. But it does not always hit its target. Now,
are you going to go back and second guess yourself
later on as to whether or not you should drop that
bomb? If you do, you will lose your mind.
People have talked about Vietnam saying that it's
the war that we can't forget because we learn so
much about ourselves. What kind of things did you
learn about the human nature? I learned that
people can be very mean to other people.
I don't know what you've read on, and I keep
referring to this My Lai Massacre, but here was a
platoon of U.S. Army forces that went into a
village men, women, and children of in a ditch and
systematically shot them. Now that absolutely
boggles my mind. So what did I learn? I learned that
we can be a very cruel people. I know that that's not
an isolated incident. That lesser things
happened all over.
My discussions with my contemporaries when I was
on the Army staff
showed me that, yes, that happened more often than
we'd like to believe. But again, I put that on the
leaders.
His company commander and his battalion
commander, I assigned equal responsibility with
that of Lieutenant Kelly because If Cali had been
properly led, he would have known that had he done
something like that, that his company commander,
his battalion commander, would have nailed his
hide to the wall, he wouldn't have done it. But the
potential for doing it is there. We are a mean
people. The Vietnamese are mean people. They did
the same thing to their people. They would go into
villages that had been sympathetic to the
vehicle. And they'd go in, and they would do this
very same thing. They'd wipe them out. So we are
mean people. I learned that. I learned also that we
are very compassionate people. Most of us want to
do good. There's good and bad within all of us. Most
of the time, good wins. Sometimes bad wins.
Some people allowed their pride and their ego to do
things which were not in the best interest of
either their units or the Vietnamese.
The desire to succeed. They used to have what they
called a body count, which in many units was a big
deal. It wasn't with us. I can say that coming from
above, I was never pressed for body count. In
talking with my contemporaries that I knew in the
Pentagon, it was a constant thing. So if it sounds
as though I'm prejudiced, I guess I am. We were
better led.
Just that simple.
How do you feel about the media coverage that went
on during the war? I would assign, on a scale of 1 to
10, I would assign the media coverage as a minus 10.
There obviously are good people in the media. But
for every good person, there were 10 who were
looking for one thing and one thing only,
something that would gain a headline, whether it
was two minutes on the television or were 10 column
inches in a paper. Just as a for instance, on the